just getting tired being tough was the
purpose of fighting
if I will end up not being able to fight
for the only person that I can fight
[Applause]
for heavyweight champion of the world I
was 13 years that I decided that I was
going to be a professional fighter but I
have no money we don't have shoes we
don't have food there's not a gym I have
to do something for that dream so I left
Cameron you need to get to Spain I was
reading that people died oh a lot and
you were drinking water that had dead
animals we had no choice I attempt in
the ocean I fell six times at trying to
climb the fence but B while it was the
toughest part why didn't you give up
when your dream is so big it's hard to
give up and the day that we arrive in
Paris I can start that dream to become a
war
Champion heavy in the world you left the
UFC because a disagreement with Dana
White what's the truth easy he didn't
want to and then you f an Joshua
honestly on that fight there was in lot
of unfairness what do you mean they have
a lot of tricks do you think they were
doing that intentionally yeah it was so
messy and then life shows how cruel it's
capable of
being when my boy pass away now was a
moment that I really feel like a
failure have you been able to
[Music]
grieve the DI overa raffle is about to
close anyone that subscribes to the D
before we hit 7 million subscribers
which is probably going to be in a
couple of days time you will be included
in the raffle and on the day we hit 7
million subscribers we are giving away a
lot of money can't buy prizes to all of
you so hit the Subscribe button get in
before 7 million and I'll announce the
prizes and the winners in the comments
below when we hit 7 million
subscribers Francis we met in a hotel
room in Paris MH it was me you tiar omry
and chy and several other people and um
I knew you from TV I'd watched you fight
but I had no
idea about your story and it's funny cuz
we all went around one at a time tierry
me um and then you and shared our early
story and when we came to your story I
just couldn't believe it was true I
couldn't believe it was true really of
of course I'd never heard and I sit here
and interview people for a living I've
never in my life heard a story like that
from where you started to where you
ultimately ended up and I know you've
told it before to some people
but I have to start there because
because it I think it creates the
context of everything that you are today
and the man that sits in front of me so
if you take me back to West
Cameroon in
1986 yeah what would I see what was your
childhood
like um I think you will see two parents
that are just
struggling um making it a dad who was a
carpenter and then a mom that really
didn't have job and then at some point
she she was doing whatever she find
whether it's like selling uh cook some
stuff and sell in the in the trade so
that's that was it in back then back in
1986 the average person lives on $1,500
a year in West Cameron that's what I
read oh that's a lot oh really
$1,500 a year that's a lot of money how
much money were your family living on a
year a year oh definitely less than
that less than thousand for
sure and you're in a village of about
11,000 people yeah I mean yeah maybe
back then I think now we are over is
over 20 or 20,000 people or 30,000
people now I found some
pictures take a look at these pictures
what are these different pictures can
you describe them to me what they are oh
yeah those uh this is me and my mom in
our kitchen um yeah this was uh when I
won the UFC title uh and then I I said
it there on purpose like you know I've
been sitting in this kitchen since when
I was a kid so dreaming about boxing and
everything so I got to go out there from
this kitchen go out there get that belt
of a world champion and bring it back
and set it in that same kitchen and sit
in the same spot that I used to sit then
I'm like at the end of the day not only
everything is possible it's not such a
big deal you
know for anyone that can't see this cuz
they're listening on audio it with all
due respect it it looks like there's the
floor is mud and the walls are mud and
brick
yeah so looks like a m yes that's that's
how we build house because it's the less
cost you want because you make like a m
to make to make bricks with it's not
like a brick with sand and C it's just a
m so that's some it's like a mud hut
yeah and you're sat you're sat there on
the floor with with your mother no on
the floor on the chair on the I mean I
wouldn't call that a chair but it's a
piece of wood is a chair piece of wood
which is a chair you can sit in the
piece of wood
comfortable was this was this a happy
childhood
no um absolutely not but for some reason
um I think regardless of everything I
owe who I am today to my childhood you
know um as much as I hate my childhood
my childhood I was so mad so upset about
it since we didn't have the minimum the
minimum necessity like even like brush
uh toothbrush stuff like that you know
book to go to school even like a uh
petrol to put in the lamp and learn we
didn't have some time sometime like you
see the fire there right on the picture
the fire where we are cooking on the
wood sometime you're going to take your
book there and read it like this like so
this is just a fire you've made with a
bunch of wood and some rocks and you
would go and read by the that fire so
you could see your book yeah we cook uh
they put some food on top of a uh the
the bricks or the stone there to cook
and then meanwhile you're using the fire
the flame to to light up and read your
book sometime what made your childhood
so unhappy though what was it other than
the the difficulty the challenge of
everything uh as I say like we miss
everything uh
most of the time we a lot of time we
will be walking bare food because we
don't have shoes uh or we will be like
uh fixing shoes in 10 in Thousand Ways
you know to still have a shoes our pants
will be having holes all over uh and we
will still trying to do we will go to
school be embarrassed because uh maybe
sometime we don't have a pen or pencil
or notebook or Haven pay scholar fee and
they're going to um kick us out from the
classroom so all that stuff was
embarrassing not to mention like when
come a break time you don't have
something to eat uh unlik your um peers
the other kids you know you just around
on your own so it was a lot of thing
everything uh was a challenge and that's
why like when sometime I'm like you
people that are being very comfortable
never being in the struggle I'm like oh
money doesn't make happiness money blah
blah blah I'm like give me the money and
then keep the
happiness because I have been without
money and I know what it feels like all
day long I prefer being with
money you really describing the
comparison that causes the unhappiness
between yourself your family who you
guys were and the other kids yes
absolutely I mean how many time do I get
sick and didn't have a peer couldn't
even go to the hospital we couldn't even
have a PE from around uh the street a
pill yeah and then you're just home sick
like this hoping having some prayers
maybe luckily sometime go in the bush
and find some um
REM uh to cook and hopefully that he
works but you can't afford what were you
eating during that time when you didn't
have the money Farm um corns beans
peanut uh stuff like that yum uh
casava um
veggies stuff like that is there a
moment you look back on your childhood
and think that was the worst Moment For
Me growing up just a memory or something
that happened that you thought this was
really the the bottom for me I would not
say the bottom I mean regardless of
everything I think
um I was lucky and uh I think I was
gifted to be able to handle that that a
proper way you know uh when I look at it
today I'm impressed of the way that I
handle it and uh even without knowing
where that would lead me where I was
going with that I just handled it like
find a way out but I never like feel
like in a bottom you know in fact like
one of my biggest motivation came out of
that situation like uh I was around 13
years old and he was someday around 300
p.m. they kick me out of the classroom
one more time and I think that day I was
pissed I was very pissed like almost
crying like okay what the hell is this
like what do I do to to deserve this
like why is this so unfair you know uh
and then the look of the other kids on
me and didn't stand that either you know
then therefore I uh it was now a
challenge I promised myself that I going
to change that I going to prove them
it's not my fault I was just a child
just as them uh which doesn't have the
same opportunity as them just we
couldn't have a parent that can provide
for them but in fact the minimum that I
had wish wasn't enough was
um something that I work for I earned I
know the value of it and even though you
have more they have more than me they
didn't earn it you know they they they
give it to them but they didn't earn it
I started I started to work in the s San
Quarry I was uh 9 years old so which was
a sand mine yeah sand mine and what you
doing you're you're using a shovel to
pick up sand and pick sand or di dick
sand in on the mountain um so I mean I
know that I get to realize that even
though I have less I work for those less
and I work hard for those that and even
though they have more they don't really
know the value of what they have so in
fact I'm not beneath them in fact I'm
quite Superior why were you kicked out
of the classroom that
day uh when you were 13 he was I think
he was uh scholarship that that exact
same day I think was scholarship uh the
fee The Scholar fee oh okay so you
kicked out of school because you didn't
have the money yeah because I haven't
paid the annual fee I haven't complete
the annual fee and uh yes that day he
was it but you know he was the same
thing over on over this year next year
the year after and uh that day I think
it was a signal and I'm like this is
going to change and um but the problem
now um I was was in the situation that I
needed to do more than others to to be
noticed you know I was I wanted to prove
them that that's no the the perception
that they have on of on of me is not who
I am I'm better than that and
uh yeah so I was 13 years and that's the
day that I decided that I was going to
be a professional fighter a professional
boxer it was the day that I really
decided growing up I want like karate I
want this I want that but I get to the
point that I want something that not
only will be my passion but at the same
time will provide for me and help me to
provide for my family as well and then I
come across like okay boxing combat
sport is the thing to do but problem I'm
13 years old there's not um there is not
a gym in um 50 Kil 50 miles uh radius
and uh I haven't I never see a gym you
know I never saw a gym before then and
even after that time I think I stayed in
the village until I was 22 was the
moment that I'm like okay enough is
enough I can just be dreaming I have to
take action I have to do something for
that dream then I leave the village I I
moved to the city I mov to some place
that I don't know and then just like
sell everything that I have to start
boxing and I was 22 at that time I've
heard you say as well about your father
my whole life my father was the example
for me of what not to do yeah I think
that's the best thing that ever happened
to me because if my dad wasn't what he
was I could have been what he was but I
still love him a
lot yeah because again like from my
perspective
um he is the person that affected my
life the most he was
violent and then I happened but he
wasn't capable of
uh canalyzing his energy his strength or
no how to use it then maybe
if they have a argument or something
usually at time people was fighting a
lot but he was Stronger so he basically
end up beating
other people so makes the them the
victim and him the guilty right so and
then he has a reputation because when
you get into so many
fight uh in the in the hood and you and
you're winning any fight so you're just
a bad guy you know so it has that
reputation uh from people don't really
like his behavior and then
uh that's something that I understand
really quick and then who have affected
me I didn't want to have that reputation
although I like everything uh that
related with power I was very into it
but I'm like no no way they are talking
to me about my dad basically like the
divorced I was 6 years old so I started
go live with my ants and this and
everywhere they would be like yes you
just yeah he's doing like his father
he's must be like his father stuff like
that and he pisses me off like so bad
like I don't want to be have that
reputation even though I like everything
with strin power fighting you know then
that's how like I ended up find those
boxing combat sport stuff he was the
right thing to do because there was a
rules there was a rules he was organized
and everything was right to do and he
wouldn't affect your reputation when you
get into a boxing mat match or character
fight you win you're a winner they
celebrate you they don't blame you from
beating somebody he was a violent man
outside of the home but also inside the
home yeah little bit to you and your
mother we will get some we will get some
Spain I mean in Africa uh at that time
that's kind of uh thing was happening a
lot into a lot of fames so he wasn't
something nowadays things a little
different but he wasn't something that
was very different you know just so he
was kind of like strict straight guy
yeah was he violent towards your mother
uh sometimes sometime it could
happen he passed away when you were 15
years old yeah it
did how how did that impact you at 15
when he passed
away uh you know no he
wasn't
um he wasn't a big part of my life at
that at time
um but yeah you get affect you think
about like your dad and the fact that
you will never see him again you know
time to time for months you think I am
like man so this is it and yeah he
affected you a lot I mean you're hurt
but you just have to keep rolling
when he passed away he couldn't afford
to go to the hospital yeah he was sick
he was at home for months sick uh just
stay in bed uh couldn't even go out to
the toilet on his own anything he has
one leg that was get
uh
rotten and was just there like that
until he Di and that was something that
I look at it I'm like man I think I need
to do something something I need to take
action because this kind of thing might
happen uh again in the future or in my
to my mom or to somebody close and I
won't be I will be powerless and uh no
doesn't have to be like this you know so
that was one of the reason like just
being sick be at home on to die maybe we
could have saved him if we have money
maybe he could have still be alive if he
could have go to the hospital but nobody
knows and nobody will ever
know a couple of
years after I was looking at my mom and
I asked myself if she ever got sick what
would I do and it scared the hell out of
me at that point I knew I had to do
something to at least be able to provide
her some decent
healthare I always wonder what it would
be like if my dad was still alive today
I wish I can have him in my life today
even just for a day
yeah well
uh after my d uh passed away and then I
think that was also a shock of our
situation I realized I mean I was 15 by
the time I know that our situation
wasn't good we W living in a good
condition but that was like a eye
opening like okay this how bad it is he
didn't go to the hospital for months I
was going there time to time and he was
suffering in pain and everything it
didn't go to the hospital and uh even
when he passed away I could have I keept
having nightmares of seeing him like in
pain screaming at night stuff like that
and I'm like this not happening again
bro
like he was tough right so uh
um now that was not only like I was
thinking that uh when I grow up I have a
family and I want to provide them uh
provide to them and then get them in a
good situation in a better condition but
that was like okay this something that
can happen again what would you do it
could be yes it could be your mom it
could be one of your siblings or it
could some day be your own kid what will
you do like just sit there and no I need
to do something
so that's I I took actions you know and
then uh yeah in the other hands seeing
where we were when my dad passed
away I always wonder like what would it
be like if he was
around if he could turn around and see
us what would he say like how would he
feel I mean he always uh and I miss
those moment that I I replicate uh our
family a lot you know growing up we
never have to eat in the dining table
like this we didn't have a dining table
um but uh for the past year I've been
replicating that like I will have we
have nice house with table dining tables
and sometime I will get there and then
regroup everybody in the table and then
even though I don't speak I look at that
table and know that somebody is missing
there's one person missing you know who
could have be the to to to make that a
perfect T you know even though it's
quite uh enjoyful to be with those who
are there it's still like a blessing to
have them um but it's still sad not to
have one person
there you start dreaming at that very
young age you start dreaming of a
different life and I was reading that
you were pretty obsessed with
America you were signing your signature
San Francisco not like obsessed I love
America I always love America like since
I I uh I name myself American boy I name
I give myself a nickname of American Boy
when you were young yeah like kids
around will call will call me American
boy because I tell them that's my name
and at 17 you said that you left that
small town is it called Betty betti yes
the village that's the V that you left
and you um you moved to a different town
mhm you went to Cameron's largest city
where you started boxing City yes
Dua why did you leave he wasn't at 17 at
17 I left
uh I abandoned school because I couldn't
continue ah okay so you left school at
22 okay so 22 you decided you wanted to
move City yeah had you ever been to a
gym before before when was the first age
you went to a gym
uh a boxing gym yeah kind of 22 22 yeah
when I left the village to go find one
um why did you end up leaving Cameroon
and what age was it when you left
Cameroon I left Cameroon I was around um
I was 26 around 26 when I left Cameron
why did you leave well I knew that I
couldn't make it there uh as a boxer
because I started boxing and I know that
reality there I know the truth even
before I started boxing I I knew the
reality I knew that uh it can happen
there you know I need a big stage I need
somewhere that
um there's more boxing is well developed
uh where did you want to
go first he was always
America but uh from Cameron there wasn't
a way to come to America I wasn't going
to swim to the uh Atlantic
Ocean so the easiest way
the more Payway was to go to Europe so
April the 3D you're 25 26 years old um
2012 which doesn't feel like it was that
long ago 2012 is when I left it was 2012
yeah that's when I left that's when I
left my secondary school and at that
time you leaving Cameroon yes and you're
objective was you were going to try and
get to to Spain or get to Europe yes so
you were going to walk from Cameroon to
Europe uh it wasn't work I mean from
camaron uh I was in Dua I took a bus to
Y then I took a train to the train to
North camon and then we took like a we
started take like a um um how do they
call CL
l no no no small car that you know they
know how to avoid police uh uh station
and all those stuff on the road so
that's how we get from Cameron North
Cameroon to Yola in Nigeria and
then Yola to Cano and then Cano
Niger and so you traveled from Cameroon
to Nigeria to n to Algeria to Morocco to
Morocco yeah and then
how did you get through the Sahara
Desert uh he were we we were lucky uh
our group didn't have so much of a
trouble um even though it was 25 of us
in the back of a pickup
truck yeah but uh we made it the truck
didn't broke up uh we get it out there
safe people died
going oh a lot like uh all the way you
will see like sket around skeletons
skelet is in the desert and just look
other way other way like no You' see
skeletons and look away yeah how how do
you afford where does the money come
from to get go on this journey to get
out of Cameroon and to try and get to
Europe cuz it must cost money yeah from
the beginning um the beginning is not so
hard uh because it's something that you
prepare for for years you don't just
wake up one day and go like this you
prepare for you don't know how much you
need but you know that the much that you
can have you you can use it to go you
know so I have some savings that I've
been saving saving for a little
while I took some with me and I give
gave some to my little sister to keep it
ready in case I call because I didn't
know where I was going and then we have
heard that there's a lot of smugger
Smuggler uh on the way so you better
don't carry what all your money on your
on you so as much as you're going you're
going to call and then they will send
money uh until it's over and then you
start to figure out on your own what is
the you say it so casually but what is
the reality of that of that Journey you
know I was reading that you were
drinking at times drinking water that
had dead dead animals inside the water
yeah when we first crossed the desert uh
we get to South Algeria um in a tamaras
set we found a water well and it was
almost dry and there was a little water
that was there for I think for months
there was death animal and all the uh
leaves everything was inside the water
but um
we were so dehydrated because our water
in finished in the desert like hours ago
so at time the water didn't look good at
all it was pretty bad but I think the
philosophy right here was like okay
whether I drink the water and if he has
to kill me he kill me later or I just
die now by dehydration I think when
that's the only two Choice it's easy to
choose one
die now or die a little
[Laughter]
later what does all of this this
experience do to you as a man in terms
of your your resilience and attitude
towards life you probably don't even
know because you just are the way that
you are but you must see that you're
different from other people in the
Western
World I think in general in Africa we
are quite different uh to um the Western
World um we we have more not that in the
Western World people don't have hardship
but we
have mostly most of us we have hardship
and toughest one for the most part you
know um like because in the Western
World you will not see it's it's not
very often that you will see kid that
that have experiment uh famine you know
like uh going to to sleep without eating
or something
I think the S the is the West is more
designed to stay away of those kind of
trouble you might not have home but you
can still have something to eat but in
Africa um most people they will not even
have that and then um the good thing and
I think the different that I found so
far is that in Africa you know from your
early age that you are not counting on
not body you are not expecting anything
from anybody it's all on you and as long
as you get that the rest of your life
get
better because you go out there and
figure it out but you go in a lot of
Western Country and
then even though coming from where you
come from uh you see that there's a lot
of opportunity and people are still
there sitting complaining we don't have
this this should be like that it should
be like that you'll be like man this is
like more than all what I need you know
because you at the point that you don't
need you don't just need what can be
given to you what will be given to you
is just a way is uh a what could be
given to you is just a way for you to uh
a preach to help you get where you're
going because you have set um your goal
Way Beyond what you you can get you how
long does it take you to get across the
Sahara Desert across the Sahara Desert
itself it took uh one day we didn't stay
our uh again we were lucky our car
didn't broke up so they drove for about
I think 20 or 22 hours and eventually
you get to
Morocco and Morocco from Morocco you
need to get to Spain which is difficult
that was the toughest part I spent
almost one year in Morocco trying to get
to Spain yeah trying to get to Spain I
did a lot of attempt uh in the in the
water and also in the in the fences when
you were living in Morocco where were
you
staying wherever you find in the desert
uh in the forest uh it depend on like
what you're looking for you you know for
example if you want to go to the fence
try the fence to escalate the fence um
which is in
Mia for the most part then you have to
stay in the forest of gurugu it's like
living in the forest between trees you
know and then you HT what are you
eating what you eating everything that
you find sometime uh there are people
that can make trap and try uh get some
animals but uh for the most part we will
wait nighttime to go to the market uh
because the police is always around you
know the on the cover police we will
wait for the night for night time go to
the market go to the market trash and
then find like rot rotten stuff like
that they throw away whether it's tomato
potatoes um chicken legs because they
didn't eat chicken legs was the best in
for us so we will find stuff like that
in the trash and go back in the forest
and try to make a meal how we don't have
money were you try at that time were you
trying to figure out learn how to get to
Europe were you trying to learn the best
way because I can't imagine or did
someone tell you how to get to Europe
there's a lot of people there that is
trying to do the same thing it's not
just you you left your house by
yourself but by the time you get to some
point you start meet people that are in
the same journey and by the time you get
in Morocco there's a lot hundreds of
people are you training at the time are
you trying to stay fit yeah sometime in
the forest I mean you have nothing to do
you do pushup you do some apps but
otherwise what would you
do and you were still dreaming of being
a boxer even though you were oh yes that
was that was the thing
I mean that was my motivation I think if
he wasn't about that I wouldn't have
left my
country he was just about
that I did I never thought about
anything
else so that was the reason where I left
how did you how did you know you'd be
good at it I didn't
know but he was about to find out I
didn't know at all I had no idea I I
could have be very bad I could have be
good
so he was just about to give it a try
and if it doesn't work then at least a
try you know I think is the is the most
important thing is to try and give it
all and if it doesn't work then well we
reset you there's two ways to get to
Spain you can go over the wall or you
can go across the water through the sea
yeah and across the water could be very
dangerous dangerous and difficult
sometime I
try couple times did you try the wo yeah
the bobbed Wire yeah I Tred the Bob I
have a lot of scar on me a lot of Bob
wire scar on me really like those are BB
wies those you see my finger spit my
finger into like on my skin you will
find on my stomach here on my feet I F I
try I have a lot of that uh um I try to
I attempt in the ocean like uh six I
fell six time what happens when you you
try and go over the bbwi fence is it did
they catch you um where the the spot
that we picked because it's about like
12 or 14 miles of fence with B wire so
we will have like a Outlook guy that
will go walk around all the those uh
fence and then like trying to identify a
spot that there is not
too much bab wire or that the bab wire
has fell you know uh and when there's
not a lot guard because there's guard on
the Moroccan side and there's guard on
the spin side and some way there's like
three fences and then bab Wi on like
maybe the first one or the
two there's not a chance that unless you
can fly you cannot go there and it's
like 7 m High 7 m High 7 m high so it's
it's not possible with bab wies without
bab wies yeah that's good but and then
they clean the surrounded of the uh of
fences so the guy have to stay like far
from the distance to trying to identify
if there's a failure of bwire somewhere
you know so it's very difficult and uh
on there's a police a Moroccan on the
Moroccan side there's like a boxes of um
uh God mhm in like interval I don't know
maybe 20 M every 20 M there's a God 20
30 m there's a boxes of God sometimes
some boxes can be empty but from where
we are you don't see need somebody to go
there like a Weg every time read
everything monitor the um um uh all the
information you know like the the post
the the guard how theyve been um the
schedule yeah how they been changed
because it's permanent but one person
doesn't stay there 24 hours I think it's
like 8 hours so you you have when you
spotted a spot that there's not so much
bab then you'll be like okay there's a
Outlook very far there there's a Outlook
from the spin side very far and then
these boxes is there guard inside he
might take him days to just find if find
out if those boxes have God someday is
going to go by and then like wait they
can stay in the same spot for like 2
days just to wait and then when the
truck come uh comes to uh change uh ship
for the gods to change for the god to
shange shift and then he will see which
box have the God and which box does a
have and then what time they come and
this what time they go if they pray what
time they go to pray and he he you need
all those information before prepare a
attack and you prep eventually you
prepared an attack for the fence yeah
and sometime you prepare the attack
you see all those you collect all those
information then as you are getting
closer to the fence you realize that
there was a b wire you couldn't just see
from where you were at MH you know or
that maybe there's someone that is in
the floor they dig like 5 m long like
this wide and then they throw B wires
all the way then you you ran you ran by
uh maybe 30 m or 100 100 m m they can
see you coming they know that you're
coming now you are taking advantage on
like because you in a group of a people
and then you get closer and then you
find like 5 m back wire you can jump 5 m
it's not possible you know so so what
you do you run back what you run back or
some by the time you run back uh if it's
a group of you some people will fall in
the bow because they didn't see or maybe
you in the front line you see but you
can't go back because there are people a
mass behind you coming they just push
and then you fall inside the back wire
did you ever try and climb the fence and
did you get caught yeah I try to climb a
fence uh I get out of those B wires on
the floor once the only and that was the
time that I fell in the B wire I trying
to climb the fence but the bab on the
fence
was painful big like I was trying to
hold it and he was just catching my face
like like oh okay I
see like so and um I get to the point
that I'm like you know I rather be aive
without being in
Europe uh instead of being dead in
Europe like wait it's going to be
another
time it's not possible so you eventually
decide that you want to go via the see
in a boat you're going to try and take a
small little dingy yeah that was that
was um I mean even before I tried the B
wire the first thing that I tried it was
a boat and why did that not work I mean
it's not like the boat is a small
inflatable boat that you can use in your
swimming pool stuff that they use in the
swimming pool we call it dinghy you can
put it in the swimming pool you get it
in Walmart in Walmart yeah yeah exactly
so that's a you tried to cross from
Morocco to Spain in one of these small
inflatable boats um you couldn't swim no
I don't know how to swim but guess what
I ended up being a
captain captain of the what of the
boat because he's still need a captain
he still need somebody to organize
somebody that knows how to pattern
somebody know where we are going
somebody know how to organize like for
10 people to get in the same boat from
uh going from the ground to the ocean
and then like how do they they get all
those organization and then I I practice
I did it so many time that I become I
became an
expert so you and I still don't know how
to swim you tried six times to get
across mhm what happened in those six
times uh sometime we get
caught the majority of time we get
caught and what does that what happens
if you get caught they send you back to
the desert they send you back to the
desert yeah to the desert uh not to
Morocco no
you are in Morocco you get caught by the
Morocco guard yeah but then they just
bring you back to the city or something
no because um they have been financed to
protect uh people from a b they have
been financed uh by European union or
something like that from holding you
guys down there so every time that the
uh cash somebody they make a report of
that person uh that okay we C somebody
and then we send them back out of
Morocco they will just bring you to the
to Algeria Border in the desert and
throw you gu there and you will figure
out your way so they throw you back in
the desert without food every time you
got caught
yeah I mean it's pretty pretty horrible
um why he's alive and uh even till today
there's people out there still doing the
same thing and even though he's getting
harder and harder I don't know how they
do but I don't want to find out he
horrible so you would but then you you
went back again and tried again for a
seventh time why didn't you give up
you've tried defense the fense doesn't
work you've tried Crossing six times in
a small inflatable boat that doesn't
work why didn't you give up what for
give up go back to Cameroon maybe live
in what go back to
what didn't I get a job in cam in
Morocco
uh why couldn't I why shouldn't I try
again it was all about
trying and I think like when your dream
is so big when you have something it's
hard to give up you know like you get to
the point
that
you um you're capable of risking more
for Just a Dream which is something that
a normal person would not understand
like I just ask myself now like why
didn't I give up at that time why do I
keep doing this why did I take those
risk because there was a moment that
even now I think about it I'm like that
was stupid he was like a dead sentence
you just get lucky from coming out there
alive you know but I took those decision
your dream was so big that he um blinds
you you couldn't see any anything else
except what you have not what is in
front you couldn't see anything in front
of you except what you have in your mind
you could only see what is in your mind
and regardless what is in in front of
you what um the obstacle is in front of
you you can only see what in front of in
your mind and it could nothing could
stop you and what was that in your mind
that was pulling you
dream dream to make it to go have that
boxing you know uh that uh boxing
career um set up a stability for me and
my family and my potential kids so they
don't have to go to what I been through
you know so uh I knew that if I give up
I wouldn't be able to look at in myself
in the mirror like this he would have be
asham of to leave with myself I couldn't
leave with myself it was hot you thought
about it you think about like oh maybe
maybe there's not a way what for like
going back and then maybe some not
really have something to do and some day
you see your your child get sick and you
you feel powerless just as your parent
were to you I'm like no that's not
happening and then the seventh
attempt was
successful yeah take me take me to that
seventh attempt of getting across the
sea to get to Europe you you get in the
boat there's you and a couple of other
men you start paddling the sixth at the
sixth attempt was close to the winter
okay we get
caught and I was this close we were
already on the other side we get caught
by a uh Army it wasn't even like a um
um
uh
the I don't know how the the Coast Guard
he wasn't even the Coast Guard he was
the army with a big ship and they were
just passing by going
somewhere after 3 hours inside the ocean
we were paddling we knew that we are
getting there and then we get
caught back in Morocco they knew that we
are gone we made
it and then um at that time he was like
close to Winter the winter was coming
the water wasn't stable anymore we
couldn't attempt
anymore and for
me she was that I tell myself that the
day that I'm touching the ocean again
I'm not coming back
ever I don't know
exactly what I was with willing to do
but I'm like it's not happening this is
it you know my frustration was top to
the level
so we
uh we um recruit back in the forest
trying those try fences or just stay
there during the winter because the
water I mean yes you can try some crazy
stuff but only when you see that there's
an ounce of a chance but when you look
at the oceans the big mon monster rising
up with those waves you know that you
cannot go through there's no way no you
can't do that a small boat on a on a
small inflatable boat and it's cold it's
freezing so I think what was uh even
scary the most was the coal you would
just get frozen out there you know so I
stayed in the forest for like months uh
months and uh once when the U winter was
um by the touching the end I had a
friend that people he was in t t and
then he reached out to me he said I have
a I have a
ship let's go I couldn't leave Tang I
did everything I get to the bus station
and was so much police and this I didn't
want to end up in in the desert in USDA
I'm like okay
just and then the next day one one uh
the next day um we are running from the
police uh from 4:00 a.m. to like maybe
4:00 p.m. we came back to our spot I
open my phone I saw like 12 M
call I checked and then he was like
Ito made Ito was the guy that was
calling
me I'm like damn I could have been
making it too with them did they get
they got to Europe yeah they got to
Europe like bro come
on I couldn't sleep there anymore and I
have a lot of call and people was like
yes we want you to be our captain you
this that that that I'm like I'm going
you know and I didn't want any promises
like oh we going to do this buy a uh
boat in one week or no I have a guy that
we've been talking for a long time he
say I have a boat already I'm like let's
go so you get on a boat an inflatable
boat I heard that you wrapped yourself
in silver foil no no I didn't but um I
was planning um we put a life jacket
though we had the one thing that we are
very um straight about is a life jacket
yeah I didn't but because
over time you learn a lot of stuff and
you know that those silver for uh would
deviate radiation from like a you know
they have the red Rader yeah yeah yeah
so if you wear the silver then the the
radar can't find you yeah the radar can
find you he can see you because when the
radar is going like this and then he see
like uh I think it's infrared or
something and then he see movement he
like but when you have that se for you
they can see you so that time tell me
about this successful Journey you get in
the boat not you and a few other men
you're the captain no we didn't get in a
boat I went to rabber which there were
what's rabber a city okay there were I
went from uh NAD to Raba to meet them
like okay when are we going to Tang
because I've been in I've been in t i
I've been living in Tang for so long um
until winter that I went back to to NAD
so they are living in a Raba which is
kind of like a city and they have those
little job of construction I'm like when
are we going I meet them there and like
okay let's go I'm like oh we are still
working we're going to get paid on
Saturday and this is what when like I
think this was like Tuesday I'm like bro
I'm not staying here until Saturday bro
bro my blood was boiling
like I'm like man I miss this I could
have been making it with uh with it with
the other guy that called me so
we the the leader the the head guy of
the group he said okay then I'll go with
you uh because I was a captain I I need
to go and check the place and everything
say I'll go with you the rest of people
they can wait until we give everything
is good we give them uh sign so they can
come we move by the time we touch ground
we are stepping down of the bus in
Tangier I got sick I got a
fever and we are going to
this house inside mod we have to take
our shoes off walk inside mod to get
into this house to sleep something like
that and I was sick bro but I can't tell
anybody that I'm sick I'm the
captain and people saw me in t I'm like
wow this guy is here he's going to make
it he's not coming back so they trying
to bribe the the guy that I was to get
them in the in the group and you I'm
like no we collect the money together to
buy um to buy the boat so I can uh kick
take anybody out of it uh I'm like if uh
because they call me vam they say if
vanam is the captain you guys are not
coming back you're going to make it and
I was sick nobody
knows so long story short uh we've been
there for like couple days and I didn't
even have any money to
eat and then uh but I check internet
every day to check the weather the
weather to see how the ocean is and he
wasn't so was terrible and I found one
day I think was Tuesday and he was the
second April 2nd
2013 and I say this day is good because
this is the speed of the wind this is
the uh direction of the wind this this I
know that thing I don't know how I know
it but by the time I knew it properly I
was a
captain so I say tell your guy to come
this day because we uh because we are
leaving by the time they come with the
boat we are not sleeping here with the
boat we have to just be going with the
boat because it's a very even the police
when they like uh bust into houses they
will search for that mhm and they came
we get to the to the to where we were
going next to where we were going but
the police car was up there so we
couldn't inflate here and then put the
raffle inside the ocean without them
seeing us now we have to make a
detour all night long we make a detour
to go somewhere in the
front and uh even though I was sick
usually Captain you don't carry stuff
because they protect
you for the big action for the main
action which is inside the ocean and
then while we are making these dets some
people are being left behind and this
I'm like bro where's the where is the
boat where is the RAF they say oh it's
here is to this guy I'm like bring that
raffle if you stay back stay alone don't
stay don't stay back with the
raffle I take that thing I like if
somebody want to go he has to cash up
with me I just lead the way and keep
going and all night we go up and then
finally go down to the um step and find
a place and it was all
rocks and I'm
there you know we used to go to where to
the beach so there is a sand MH it's
easier because like when you walk to the
sand like this to go inside water and
every footstep get you deeper and deeper
now you are in the middle of rocks and
then the ocean is there you don't know
how deep is the ocean there and how you
going to get in that ocean you want just
you can just jump like this to get in
the ocean and then uh the wave was so
strong you you will he like
like damn was it night time yeah early
in the morning okay because we are
waiting we are aiming to do this when uh
they call for 5:00 a.m. prayer okay yeah
but we get little late because because
of those day
too but I'm the captain I'm the one that
everybody's expecting on me and he will
we were he was uh nine of
us so I I tell them okay with me here
here let me um um find a
place you
know when something is yours is
yours I walked around and I get
somewhere in the middle of rocks I found
a spot just big as big as this table
enough to inflate the boat just enough
no more than that and he was like this
clean I touch it it there wasn't
anything sharp on it just like that
enough I went back and called the other
guys like let's go they came I'm like
okay let's infl the boat eventually the
boat Gets In The Water you go yeah and
the boat is rescued by the American Red
Cross by the Red Cross don't know if it
was I we know there was a Red Cross base
in in Spain in did you get to you got to
Spain we didn't get there but we know
that there's a Red Cross inside ocean in
fact okay in fact we have their numbers
so you knew there was a Red Cross there
so you got close to Spain yeah and then
the Red Cross came and got you we get
far from the uh Moroccan Coast but we
don't know where is the limit but we
just get far from this coast and then
trying to get as far as possible uh
inside the ocean and call but the
problem is that you're in the middle of
the ocean and even though it's where L
the two the closest distance of the two
continent uh from this side you can see
the other side but in the midor of the
ocean when they say where are you what
are you seeing you can really give them
a Direction so sometime because their
goal is just to rescue you their goal is
not to bring you to Spain and if they
cannot find you they will even call a
Moroccan Coast uh coast guard for uh
help and if you know you're lucking day
you get fined by Moroccan CU God you
know where you're going you're going
back
to
so we P like for one I think it was like
hour and a half almost 2 hours and then
there was a
helicopter uh in in front of us and he
was like standing there like he was
looking about something and I tell the
guy that okay this not a good sign
whether this helicopter can play against
us or he can play for us what we do call
we call now because when they ask if
they ask what are you seen we will see
the elicopter is right above us and then
we call so you called the Red Cross we
called the Red Cross you called the Red
Cross yes and what did you say for the
restroom oh we are in the inside the
ocean we need
help and then I don't know we pick up
the phone and start to ask if we have
yes how many people do you have a lady
in the boat and this I'm like what the
hell is this problem we are human being
and I'm like yes we have ladies even
kids we didn't have kids we have ladies
I'm like what's that what's different
that makes like you will just let off us
here because like yes even kids and say
okay what are you seeing we see we we
see the helicopter right above say Okay
welcome in did and they found you yeah
and then right after that it started
rain and the water really get bad he was
moving now we are in the middle of the
ocean in this little uh boat just as
like this table and he's like going
all we TI get tied in the middle we were
it was nine of us how long did it take
for the Red Cross to find you
uh like 10 10 to 15 minutes it's quick
yeah and they they take yeah I think a
little more maybe like 20 minutes and
they take you to Spain and then when
they when they find us because now he
was little harder to find us because it
was raining and the ocean wasn't stable
you know when the ocean is stable you
can see something from far away now this
is there something crazy that happened
inside the ocean like from the coast the
ocean is flat when you get inside at
some point bro ocean has Mountain like
there's a way that you're
climbing and then until you get to the
Peck and then there's a way that you're
going down inside the ocean I don't know
how it works but it's exactly like that
and you can see like a h Mountain inside
the ocean and they they took you to
Spain yeah they found us uh and then
took us in their in their boat they have
a real boat you know like solid big boat
that took us inside and then uh brought
us to their um headquarter which is in
in Spain and you stayed in Spain in a
Detention Center in a cell with 10 or 20
other men um for two months yes it was
like I think uh 53 days how were you
treated
treated we were eating but it was a
prison though it was quite a prison I
think you get to the point that you I'm
like maybe they should have just let us
inside the ocean
or maybe we were better in in Morocco
because you locked you can do anything
you you realize that you had freedom
even though your life wasn't the best
that's when I mean you here you're
getting Feit every
day but they tell you where when to eat
when to shower when to go sleep when to
go out and
everything and after like um couple
weeks it started to become hot because
at first you excited I'm like oh I made
it you're excited you I'm in Spain I'm
in Europe but after a couple weeks I'm
like come on man like I need my sentence
now because if you you had a fake idea
at one point and if you oh
no when you get caught you make sure
that you don't even have a receipt or
whatever on you so you threw it in the
water oh yeah when did you throw it in
the water when you saw the Red Cross
coming I no when you're sure that the
Red Cross will get you because otherwise
that will be your way out in Morocco
sometime he can prevent you not to be
through in the desert when did they they
released you from the Detention Center
in Spain yes eventually after almost two
months and they gave you
50 no not from the Detention Center
there is a Association that come charity
for refuges some organization that are
out there so they will come take you and
then bring you to their uh place and
where did you where did you want to go
what was the plan so you're now in Spain
you're free you've got
50 so my plan first of all was to go to
first I wanted to go to the UK MH but I
knew that even though I'm in Europe the
free circulation in Europe will not
allows me to get in the UK because they
are not in the that zone in the shenen
zone so I think I started for Germany
because I wanted a place that boxing was
big but for somehow I was in a group of
people that most of them they like oh we
are going to France oh Shan all this all
that and in the 9th of June 2013 26
years old now you arrive in Paris and I
read that on your first day in
Paris um you figured out how where to
eat where to sleep and you found a
boxing gym where did you sleep when you
arrived in Paris in the parking lot you
slept slept in a parking lot yeah how
long did you sleep in the parking lot
for like two months for two months you
slept in a parking lot how did you how
did you so you arrive in Paris you're
sleeping in a car park um how do you
find a gym pay for a gym oh next day I
was after it so I finally get where I
could start that dream that I've been
having for a decade what did you do did
you just walk up to the boxing gym and
say hey can I come here for
free yeah basically what I I worked in
the front des and they gave me this um
form and then I saw the price and
everything and I couldn't afford it now
I'm like can I talk to a coach to the
boxing coach and the ladies said the
boxing coach is not there today
but uh he has his substitute is there
you can talk to him and we I just
explain straightforward like okay I
arrived in Paris yesterday I don't have
where to sleep you know but all what I
want I want a place to train so that's
why I wanted to see a boxing a coach if
you can let me train here because I have
no money uh I have nowhere to sleep I
have nothing but the only thing that I'm
asking for
is a place to train because I want to
become a world champion straightforward
that was it and he
said
um if you have a phone number give me
your phone number I'll speak to a boxing
coach he'll be here on Wednesday and
I'll give you a call
back that's
how I gave him my phone number I had a
phone and then on Thursday morning he
called me and he said yes I spoke to the
coach and he agreed that you can come
and train and the next training uh is
Saturday and that's how he started did
kment yeah d k did a come on was that
man that you met that day in the boxing
gym that gave you a chance yeah and he
let you train for
free how he speak on my behalf to the
coach who let me let you train yeah and
they gave you new pair of shoes I read
that he gave you keys to an apartment to
sleep in as well uh yes after like two
months uh he gave me he gave me a key he
has like one apartment that uh he was uh
I think was ABNB or renting out and then
he get free for coule is and at time I
think uh he knows me a little bit more
and he gave me that apartment for almost
two months he he changed your life
didn't he because if he hadn't have said
yes if he hadn't have introduced you to
the person if he hadn't help have helped
you he helped me a lot he helped me a
lot changed my life I think is too much
say but he helped me a lot um I mean we
were at the gym and then he knows
exactly my situation because I was uh
clear to him telling him everything but
other people at the gym didn't know and
in fact he he at some point even tell me
that you don't have to tell your story
to everybody they don't need to know
your situation you know like why did he
help you why did he help you because he
was kind he just like me and like to
help me and uh
hear me a lot it's because he didn't
have a a reason no he didn't a lot of
people will have
expectation that maybe at time you would
you would not know but later on you will
find out but he was just genuine you
never have like a expectation you know
in fact sometime he's the guy that
sometime you will even call you will not
he will not be around shut down his
phone and everything he's always been
like that because it was quite difficult
to become a boxer in France without
having all of the correct identity
papers he eventually suggests that you
take up mixed martial arts as a way to
make some quick money um and in 2013 26
years old you went to the MMA Factory in
France and introduced your coach
yourself to a coach called Fernand Lopez
and within four months I mean he saw
something especially in you in terms of
MMA and within four months of that you
had your first MMA fight yeah
what did you think when you first saw
the sport of MMA did you had you ever
heard of MMA before no so DJ was the
first one to talk to me about MMA I'm
like oh yes you have a good striking if
you do MMA I'm like what is MMA it's
Mar okay good then what's that what's
mix Mas say yes it's like boxing with
wrestling with this I'm like ah I think
I have seen that once on the TV I was
watching TV I see something like that
that like yes if you have if you learn
some good wrestling some take down
defense little bit of a grappling and
this I'm like what's grappling to
explain the whole thing to
me and this is back in
2013 June 2013 and I'm like bro nah
that's not what I want I want you know
the Mike Tyson boxing right so yes I'm
like that's what I want you fought five
times in Europe before you were signed
for the UFC which is quite remarkable
because a lot of people spend many many
many many years trying to get into the
UFC you fought just five times in Europe
before you were offered a chance to
fight in the UFC I didn't even I wasn't
even planning to go to the
UFC and uh but as soon as I start I
started to fight in France then it
became it became very hard for me to
have a fight in France people didn't
want to fight me fight me why oh they
say I'm
brutal and I'm like it's a fighting
game I mean the the goal is to be brutal
and then I'm not having fight because
I'm brutal like I heard your coach he
actually posted on Facebook saying um
asking if anyone in Europe wanted to
fight you the post is will anybody in
Europe fight Francis yes nobody wanted
to fight you I mean no anybody at that
level because even though a lot of
people didn't want to fight me I was
still unexperienced
so he's not like they will give just
give me to anybody but nobody either
like want to take a risk there's not a
gain for a elite fighter to fight me
he's risking of losing everything but
not a not quite a lot to gain were you
aiming to be in the UFC cuz you now you
knew what MMA was but when you started
becom an MMA fighter were you trying to
get into the UFC no how did that happen
I was just like you know training uh
because I I had time I uh I was jobless
so I have all my time and I like to
train and I found MMA I found MMA very
uh exciting I like all those stuff so I
was training boxing MMA and then I start
to fight MMA and sometime maybe I will
have like um couple hundred Euro
fighting uh MMA who who was very welcome
at the at the time so I'm like let's do
this but that was it and people keep
saying oh if you improve your Jujitsu if
you do this you're going to become a UFC
champion like then
what I really like I was so focused on
boxing and then um but I think like MMA
came to me and gave me that opportunity
and then all of the sudden I'm here I
have the UFC contract ra how did that
happen how did that happen did they call
you or your agent or your manager so I
think um uh Fernando a guy that was a
manager at time uh he uh Thiago okay
Thiago okamura okay yeah and then he was
the guy that was uh pitching me to the
UFC okay so your manager your coach knew
someone who was pitching you to the UFC
yeah manager
okay and then that's how I get uh that's
how I get the UFC contract where was
your first fight in the UFC Orlando
Orlando yeah was that your first time in
America yeah uh it was the first time
and I remember like uh I get
there and I'm like okay and uh there was
somebody at the airport with a tablet
with my name on it and then picked me up
with a Cadillac brought me to the hotel
the H I had residency they check me in
brought me to my room how did it
feel then I call home I call my mom I'm
like I don't know what it is but I think
your son have made
it finally get to that like I mean like
I get to America basically so that's
what because for so many years America
was the dream to get in America and I
get in America and in a big way not the
way that I get in Europe because I get
in Europe in the service door I get in
America basically on on the red carpet
that was
it that was
2015 2015 how much that first fight do
you does that that first fight make you
rich no you don't get paid much for the
first UFC fight yeah he was $10,000 plus
10,000 uh win bonus and then with all
the commissions you got out with almost
just half uh but he wasn't he wasn't
about the fight he was more about like I
think me coming to America and all the
stuff he was more than what I was making
in the fight that's nine years after you
left Cameroon you fought for the UFC
heavyweight championship
belt and eventually you won that belt
and you you held that UFC heavyweight
title yeah but I lost I I fought before
yeah you fought quite a lot yes I fought
in uh 2018 yeah yeah um but eventually
you won the same guy yeah I lost I've
I've watched your career so I've watched
the journey and it felt like for the
first start of your career I don't know
it felt like maybe you weren't as
focused but then it felt like this this
other half of your UFC career something
had changed I was focused it's just that
I didn't I never I never done sport
before I didn't grow up as the athlete
so I didn't know how how they do I
didn't know how they train I didn't know
how to prepare for a championship I
didn't know anything so I was just out
there trying and then in that fight I
did a lot of mistake and I learned from
it and I'm like okay the good thing I
might have lost this fight but this
fight would be the biggest um fight in
my career because everything that is
coming after this fight everything that
I'm learn that I learned in this fight I
will Implement that in my game in my
career uh from now on and he'll be quite
helpful you have the hardest punch ever
recorded by the UFC the equivalent of 93
horsepower a smart car by comparison
maxes out at 80 horsepower and they
called you the Predator you did
eventually win the UFC heavyweight title
and you held it between 21 to 2021 and
2023 and eventually you left the UFC in
January
2023 because of basically a dis a
disagreement with with the UFC with Dana
White about I guess freedom and
money yes freedom and uh
treatment the way that uh I was being
treated I didn't like it was there ever
a moment where
you realized that you'd really made it
you know you're you're a young man that
come from Cameroon walk you walked your
way out of the you know through Africa
and then you got on a boat and went to
Spain and then from Spain to Paris then
from Paris to America and then you you
reach the highest mountain which is you
win the UFC heavyweight title which is
like the peak of fighting was there a
moment where you you thought I've I've
made it it's not like you reach the
higher Mountain you know uh
whatever Mountain you are on top there's
always then when you get in The Pick of
a mountain you realize there's another
Mountain that's higher you know and um
you realize that what motivate you what
keep you going wasn't the peak of the
mountain but he was the peak of all
Mountain so then you keep is never a
satisf satisfaction even though you you
take a a moment I'm like oh finally make
it to the top you know you take a breath
but you know that you will keep going
it's I think it's a mindset that uh you
have and basically will not stop like
you don't have a limit you don't have a
place that you say okay if I get here
then I'm done there's always
something uh around there's always
something which is set as a higher
Mountain you know so but I think
um what I do is to take time you know I
like to go home a lot and I like to go
back on my path and uh every step every
time I'll be there I'm like thinking of
the moment that I was there like maybe
15 years ago and he will feel like he
was just yesterday and I will trying to
see like where I am today you know see
the differ that's exactly when I
realized because when I'm here I'm just
living like it's normal like is
everybody like he was just like this all
the time but when I get back I connect
with the with the past and then I
realize how far uh the road has been and
you've you've really gone I mean it's
been a an incredible J has your mother
ever seen you fight in the UFC has she
ever been there no I triy I trying to
get her uh to my fight back in 2019 she
couldn't get a visa she get uh denied
twice and I'm like okay okay this is so
stressful I'm not doing it
again it was also embarrassing stressful
one and even for her it was very tough
and I'm like okay I'm not putting her to
this again uh there will be a moment I
think if I set up if I set set things up
pretty good there will be a moment that
things will be easier for her to see me
fight why are you fighting why are you
fighting now I mean you you made I mean
the reason you left the UFC was because
of Freedom issues and you didn't like
the treatment you wanted to be free the
argument you had with Dana um you know
you say
that essentially you you weren't willing
to um comply with the the system of the
UFC where you don't really have the
option to go and box and do other things
Dana White said that you're in a place
where you wanted to take less risks and
you wanted to fight lesser opponents for
more money so we're going to let him do
that is that true do you agree with what
he said he said you wanted to take less
risks and fight other opponents lesser
opponents to make more money I think if
we have to spend time to talk about like
what Dana White say if it's true or not
we're going to spend a whole night here
and then don't be okay with a lot of
thing um I think the situation was a
little bit embarrassing for him and then
he was going to make it statement and
find his way out less of opinion like
living my comfortable life uh career in
MMA that I'm quite comfortable into to
step into boxing to take the best for my
first uh boxing match which I never
really do a professional boxing match
that does that sound like a easy
fight I mean I think he has to say
something and um those who knows uh
those who know know that he has just has
to say something to get out of that
situation the truth what's the
truth easy he didn't want to um
compromise he didn't want to change and
I feel like that situation wasn't good
for me and uh I tell myself if that's
the end then let it
be I I mean in fact I had no guarantee
that the boxing that I've been dreaming
of doing I I will have to do it it will
happen at the time but uh I didn't just
want to comply and do thing that I'm not
okay with just because they led me with
that one option to say yes with things
that I don't like that was the thing I I
was very aware
that uh that could be it but he has to
be on my term and even though he means
like going back to Africa you know you
know I don't know Farm I I love F
farming I always love uh
farm and if that mean I had to go back
and farm I was okay with it so I made my
peace with myself uh at time and that's
why I stood with my decision I turned
down a lot of money that I didn't have
at time I was for the most part I was
broke I was living uh out of loan
so yes you're the heavyweight champion
of the world in the UFC you're broke I
mean not that broke when I say I was
broke I mean for for a he for a
heavyweight champion I
wasn't comfor millionaire yeah I wasn't
comfortable uh were you a
millionaire maybe but uh never made a
million a fight but um the most you made
was £500,000 except except except if I
have accept to um to sign a new contract
I would have been having a lot of money
but that contract was coming with a lot
of thing that I was fighting against and
uh that's why I didn't sign so I'm like
okay whatever this deal is whatever this
Contra is I'm fighting this Contra of um
instead of renewing the Contra for and
have more money and really have nothing
changed that mean I'm setting my myself
up for another for another years in the
same situation that uh I'm giving away
all the power in a contract that is not
giving me any power the power you wanted
was
Freedom yeah was Freedom was it
possibility to say okay this is not
right you can do this you know or you
have to do this you have I mean I I I
need a obligation I don't want a
one-side contract I don't want a
contract that okay there's uh I have no
right but in the other hand the other
side of the table have no obligation so
in fact
uh I mean I'm giving everything for
nothing just for money I want some of
that leverage so you wanted to be able
to decide and you wanted not like to
decide but I want I want at least some
some responsibility on the other side
showing toward me you know I want some
some
responsibility for example when I come
to like say
healthare for that level for the money
that I could have been making uh for the
money that I would have be making if I
had signed that contract I could have
have any kind of healthare that I
want but at the same time I also want
the guy on the other side of the table
to take some responsibility I'm like
okay I'm giving you a healthare for
example so you wanted some something
like healthcare included yeah yeah I
want stuff like that I want something
like a guarantee since I'm making this
of a as a living and I'm exclusive to
you you guarantee me that whenever I
could fight you find something for me
you are obligated to give me a fight
know that because if I don't sign a
contract and you want me to sign and you
want me to run out of money
and craw back to you because I need
those money then you staff me and not
give me a fight you know even though you
know that even know that you you know
that I might need two just because you
know that I might need two or three
fight to make a living to keep off up my
lifestyle then uh you strengthen back
down to one fight so I will be needing
money and then will be forced to take a
contract that I don't want just because
I need money so I want to make sure I'm
super clear on this you you essentially
wanted a guarantee of fights within the
contract so that you could a guarantee
of Engagement I'm giving everything I'm
giving up all my right exclusivity
exclusivity and go and do anything else
but I really yes but you are not
committed to anything so okay so I'm the
UFC I'm not committed to anything but
you have to give up your exclusivity
yeah and I'm not even guaranteeing that
I'm going to give you and then some some
exclusivity in that contract said in
forever yeah to exclusive forever in
certain situations but at the same time
you really have not obligation but I
have no responsibility obligation to
give you anything yeah so it's really
one-sided yeah okay so if if you decide
not to give me a fight for two years I
can't say anything and you'd starve but
if you if you call me and say oh you
have a fight in uh okay I have a fight I
want you to fight in one month and I'm
say oh I'm hurt then you have right to
say okay I extend your contract for 6
month oh okay so if you turn down a
fight then they can extend the contract
for and doesn't matter the reason for
any reason so you could be and and and
there's nobody will be consulted for
that if that's fair or not they make the
decision so you so I could know that you
were sick and I could offer you a fight
knowing that you couldn't take it and
that would extend the contract six
months
yeah so you decided to quit and you knew
that when you quit you could lose
everything you there was no guarantee
that you could could go there's not a
bigger fighting League I decided to
leave not to quit Okay you decided to
leave um and when you left did you have
a
plan not
really how do you feel about the UFC now
I don't know I think they do business
how is good for them they they do a good
business for themsel I just wanted to do
what's good for me
too and you went on to do the impossible
once again in your life because you know
many people thought that maybe you were
you were gone now you were gone from
fighting but
then after that it was announced that
you'd be fighting Tyson Fury in a boxing
match who is the World Heavyweight
Champion of boxing and by many people's
account you know I watched the fight as
well I stayed up in the UK and watched
it um you beat
him you didn't beat him on the
scorecard but I think in every sense of
the word you beat him and for that fight
you got paid I read many times more for
that one fight than you got paid in your
entire UFC career yes from one fight
with Tyson
Fury yeah
uh and even in my he would have be a
Tyson Fury fight or he would have be a
PF fight I knew that uh from that moment
uh every fight that I will make will I
will be pay more than what I've have
been making my entire career why
because uh my last year years in the
UFC I could have been making more if I
have accept the contract so I
basically live left a lot of money on
the
table in order to gain my freedom I
bought my freedom basically you know the
they said that they said freedom is not
given it's not given freedom is not free
you have to give something in order to
get
that so that's why at that point I make
so less of a money because I refuse I
turn down a lot of
money but it worked out it worked in the
end because you got paid more in that
Fury fight than you ever lucky yeah and
then I read that for the fight with
Anthony Joshua you earned about 15
million pounds which is almost 20
million true I don't know I haven't
count
yet so I can't I can't say if it's true
this is I mean but it's not true it's
not true
yeah but you earned a lot of money right
yeah lifechanging amounts of money
what's life changing I don't know enough
money 1,000 can't change life depend of
where we are standing from you're
speaking from my side or from your side
or from moai
you give you give 10 million to somebody
it's just another 10 million and he
won't change anything in his life and
you give 1,000 to somebody he change his
life he save his life he would take that
1,000
maybe send his kid at school or maybe
buy them some medicine save them from
illness or something so lifechanging
money is not the amount why are you
still why are you you still fighting
then cuz you don't you don't need to F
why why I start fighting you have to
find in order to know why I I'm still
fighting you have to know why I start
fighting why why is that I love
fighting you're not doing it for the
money no when I start fighting there
wasn't money I fought a lot of fight for
free that I had no not a pennies and
what is your goal now with fighting you
you've done it I mean you've done it you
you did the UFC you've done
boxing as I said there's always a
challenge there's always like could this
be possible can I done this can I you
know like what's the what's my limit how
far can I go I think I think whatever we
do in life is a shame if we end up not
really find our full potential or not
giving it up you know I I think I going
to give give all everything that I have
then I go home but as long as I still
feel like I have something for fighting
I have some to give to the fighting
Community uh I go to the gym I get
excited I wake up I think of training
and I get excited like oh this is it I
still have that motivation that fire in
me then I keep doing it you know I go to
the gym I train I think like oh I
learned something I have some
improvement you know or there's
something that I really want to
understand how it works or how want to
master yes I think it works like
that we have to remember that is not
just fighting it's a martial
art fighting is a martial art and
martial art never end before uh MMA came
around you will see people character
kungu
ta they doing it for like 6 until they
are 60 70 80 they are still doing it
because it's a passion every single time
you eat you have an opportunity to
improve your health and that's why I
love Zoe because Zoe helps me to make
the smartest food choices for me and my
body and as you guys will know by now
Zoe is a sponsor of this podcast and I'm
an investor in the company and if you
haven't tried Zoe I highly recommend you
do because Zoe combines My Health Data
with Zoe's worldclass science and using
those two things Zoe guides me to Better
Health every single time I make a food
choice and eat which means that I have
more energy better sleep better mood and
I'm less hungry and the most important
thing is Zoe actually works it's backed
by their recent clinical trial something
called the method study which is the
gold standard of scientific research I
started Zoe just over a year ago now and
I've been able to track my progress week
after week so I can learn how to be even
smarter the following week and if you
haven't joined Zoe yet I'm giving you 10
% off when you join Zoe now just use the
code ce10 at
checkout when you left Cameroon you had
a really clear goal you had this Vision
a really really clear
goal what is that to stand to stand on
top of the mountain and you stood on top
of the mountain but there's the biggest
mountain there's always the biggest
mountain there's always a mountain ahead
that is big what is the big mountain in
front of you now what's coming what is
that another
fight do you do you want to become the
heavyweight champion of the world in
boxing as well uh or it that's never be
my goal my goal was really because I was
aware of the situation my last fight my
first fight in boxing was less than year
ago octob October 20 uh 23 and I was
what already
37 it's not a moment in your life that
you're expecting to have a career into a
combat sport like boxing you know he was
just like okay what can I do and I think
that question still stand and even for
MMA I think there's a lot of thing for
me I've been doing even MMA for just
like what 11 years and I think I still
have so a lot of thing to learn to
experiment to to show in a fight I think
I still have a lot and I still have that
passion I'm
um I'm not very young but I still have
couple years in front of me to be doing
it because after this you have to
remember that after this maybe by the
time I'm 40
42 then I'm retired what a early
retirement we only have that short
window of a time then at 42 like is a
time that most people career just pick
up but we are forced to retire by that
time so why would I just like do what I
can do until then and see how far I can
go you fought Tyson many people think
you won the fight incredible fight um
you fought anti Joshua you lost that
fight um and I think at the end at the
end of that fight Anthony actually says
he says you should you need to carry on
boxing you need to carry on going and I
think that's the sentiment that everyone
has no I'm I'm I'm carrying on I don't
really uh take that fight as a note
because um not to say I
mean you cannot you you will be a fool
if you're going to fight basically in
boxing somebody like Anthony Joshua and
don't think that you can lose right or
trying to make an excuse of losing if
there's a somebody that you can lose
against in a combat sport then he's
somebody like Anthony Joshua right but
um honestly on that fight there was in
lot of
unfairness you know and then uh which
might have been for something or not but
there was a lot of unfairness unlike the
Tyson fight that everything was straight
and I think nobody was giving me a
chance and then the everything was
fair um no sneaky
stuff but the second one he was so messy
what you mean a lot of
tricks like that will get you everywhere
that I was going in that week I have to
wait at least 1 Hour 1 hour and a half
before the beginning or before Antony
Joshua arrived but they they always send
a car to pick me up like that amount of
time even the F day the Friday I stay in
the locker room
for 4 hour and half 4 hours and and
half they send a car to pick me up pick
up time
10:30 because you're supposed to fight
they telling me up front I supposed to
fight around midnight and 100 p.m. so
pick up time 1: a.m. yes on 1:00 a.m.
sorry pick up time uh
10:30 it's like okay good it's how it
works is that amount of time then you
get in the arena they're like oh
yeah there's a there's a producer like
oh we are we are running behind uh clock
on the broadcasting so we might be
fighting at
1:45 okay it's not that bad I've been
training to fight in that time frame in
around 1 p.m. 1:00
a.m. bro we are sitting there and
then watching Antony Joshua arrive in
the arena at 1
1:30 like how come you tell me that with
you guys tell me that I'm going to fight
around midnight and 1:00 or that is
delayed are going to fight at 1:45 and
then he's now just
arrive when he arrive we know that it's
about 2 hours before there is a fight
you don't get in the arena 1 hour before
the fight no it's 2 hours is the aage
and stuff like that they did the L
lot again not to say I couldn't lost the
fight but do you think they were doing
that intentionally yeah you you think
that
yeah I said the whole week it was like
that they were wasting your time I mean
I think it's a trick I didn't know
before but I think it's a is a trick
that they have in boxing they have a lot
of tricks and uh in fact like in the in
the week during the week my coach doing
because he a very C person and he was
like he get to the point that he was uh
really mad and was yelling about it like
no this how you get to get you do to get
fter tired and I'm like no it's okay I
didn't know how deep was the problem you
know until I get in the final set then
I'm like okay this is serious but it was
too late were you tired by the time very
tired by the time I was sleeping you
were sleeping before yeah I don't know
why I I don't know if it was just a
fatig or whatever I was in the Locking
room getting uh warm up and and felling
asleep and feeling
asleep so that's why like uh personally
yeah I take that loss but I don't put it
in the context you know I think it could
have be different do you think you could
have beat
him I still I still think I could have
beat him I could have lost two but no
that easy yeah things were so easy um
like I wasn't I don't know yeah did you
feel like yourself no no at
all no at
all but I think it was my mistake I
wouldn't I shouldn't have done good in
the fury fight I think that was what was
expecting in the fury
fight for me to lose
maybe in that um fashion you have um you
come out of the fight with Anthony
Joshua and you go back to making plans
for the future and then life shows how
cruel and unfair it's capable of being
when you're 15-month-old baby boy Kobe
passes away just a few months
ago I'm really sorry thank you and um it
is the the most unimaginable
the most inimaginable
thing
yeah that's something that I never I
never imagine and all of the sudden
nothing really
matters all of the sudden you realize
that you were complaining about a
lot instead of being feeling blessed
being grateful you were complaining
about things that didn't work but in
fact everything was working well
how are you how am I yeah alive I mean
surviving but uh not the same I don't
think he he will ever be the
same and I can't
explain how in just 15
months I mean I still ask myself how in
just 15
months a kids or a person can take this
much space and be
basically became you to the point that
when he's gone you you feel like you're
missing
too just 15 months I mean two years ago
he wasn't there and now was living good
he came and he
left and I feel
like I don't know
is is a weird type of thing
basically like uh after what I was
saying earlier like my whole life was
about to do to fight in order for my
family not to go through those situation
not to feel
powerless uh or useless in the situation
and for the very only person that I
should fight for I couldn't I didn't
even have a
chance so sometime only that idea is
painful you didn't have a chance yeah he
wasn't sick we didn't have to take him
to the hospital didn't
have anything like that you know I wish
I could have like you know take him to
the hospital find for a good doctor like
make calls and do stuff you know feel
like I'm useful I'm playing I'm useful
just as I I always want to
be so that was
it is it possible to is it possible
to have you been able to
grieve and process
it how do they grieve how do the
processes I never learn I never know how
he works you just feel it
some days you do with it somay you do
without
it how how do they deal with that kind
of
situation there's not a
um how do they
say there's not a uh process that they
set up
to to learn how to go
through people will do people will do do
it in different
ways and how long it takes to grief when
did is
stop
whenever you know one of the big
conversations in um I think that's
become quite popular is the idea of
mental health and our and protecting our
mental health and being aware of our
Mental Health
when something like that happens to you
it's the the most I mean I've never I
don't have a children yet so I don't
I've not been through something like
that but I can just imagine the the way
that I try and imagine it is I have
these wonderful nieces and nephews in my
life my brother is a year older than me
has three children and they're like my
children in a way and just the thought
of something happening to them is the
most it's the most unimag unimaginable
crushing feeling to me
um and men in particular aren't very
good at dealing with things compared to
my partner for example example she's
very expressive very emotional you she
expresses how she feels what do you like
at expressing how you
feel you don't learn how to express I
think I found myself uh very emotional
at some
point more than what I
thought you don't it's not something
that you commend it you don't control
just happen and then you you discover
yourself and you still in that process
yeah you discover your own self you
think you've been through a lot you
think you're strong you was you thought
you were strong you realize you were
I how was your family your your family
your mother everybody
else surprising I think um a lot of
people are doing pretty
good better which is for me surprise I
always walk around like the toughest
guy until now until now
yeah and I get
[Music]
to you know just being tired just
getting tired being tough think it's
exhausting being tough mean you have to
be through over and over to a lot of
which just
not easy to deal
with because people see you as a you
know they see you as a tough guy that's
your they called you the Predator they
you know I don't
know I've been questioning myself about
that
lately yeah
that's why I like you see
people trying
[Music]
to know
somebody pretend to know
somebody mean wise they don't even know
thems like you can know somebody who who
doesn't even know your own self you
don't know who you are you don't know
what you can do what can affect you how
you can deal with things that never
happened to
you so you can expect to know that about
somebody what have you been
questioning in
yourself if I can deal with
stuff if I can handle
stuff been
doubting about my
capability of stuff sometimes what what
what are you talking about in terms of
dealing with stuff handling
stuff emotional
things yeah like
um yeah even
[Music]
emotionally you know there's lot of
there some days that you wake up and you
don't you think about every about stuff
about
everything and you should really like
what's the purpose what's the goal if
it's going to end up like
this was the purpose of fighting
if I end up not being able to fight for
the only person that I can fight
for let's talk about something
else yeah I'm sorry
what else you get move on to
something I am you're in Vegas at the
moment yes but I'm going home soon going
back to Cameroon
mhm next week next week mhm what's the
plan uh going to be there for a couple
weeks I'm training now
um I want to really make a purpose make
a have a purpose you know make a sense
of all of this and I think uh I'm going
back to fight so I've been training a
little bit because
like I get to the point that I feel like
I really need to push myself to get out
there started think about something
fine fine purpose and that's what I'm
doing now training and I think I sure
fight I need a fight
so uh I might fight before the end of
the year you know I think some MMA fight
will be good to get back in the loop a
little
bit before going back to boxing
again you're fighting in a new new
League under a new promotion um yeah
which is very exciting I saw the
announcement yeah I supposed to be
fighting um no I'm not fighting in the
pfl Africa I'm fighting in pfl global uh
but yes we we we along uh we launched
the PF Africa and they announced it the
other day in Nigeria in Lagos Nigeria
with the the uh one of our new partners
ilos so been good and you're it's about
purpose now it's about finding new
purpose you said yeah finding a reason
fighting for a
reason you know something to fight
for I think is whether you you make it a
purpose to keep going or a reason to
keep going or a reason to
stop but other ways either way you can
serve as a as a reason
and your reason your purpose you're
going to get out there and find
it yeah I think my son was full of life
I think if there's one thing that he
wasn't uh he wasn't inactive he was very
active was very curious about stuff he
was and I think
uh the best way to honor him would
definitely not be to quit or to live
thing like that because of him I think
if there is a way that he would like to
things to be done was to serve as
a
motivation or to be a reason for things
to
happen that's what you've always been
Francis that's what you've always been
you've always been an
inspiration he's now an inspiration I
think he's now your inspiration yeah I
had so much in this kid like he was just
15 years 15 months old but you know I
have so many plants was doing this was
preparing that was having a b building a
basketball court was getting ready for
his
um uh like looking for a socker uh
of his side so we can go play soccer
when he started because he just started
to work when he solid we go play
everything he become he became
a a go he wasn't like just a kid he was
a go like was exciting waiting you know
his day and his time but
yeah so fighting next
the goal is to fight before the end of
the
year so I'm training I'm keeping in
shape but I have to go back in Africa a
little bit is it easy to train at the
moment or is it day by day it's day by
day I think as I said like there someday
like I don't just really want to do
anything I don't really care and those
are the day that you I mean that's how
that's what your your heart tell you
like your heart don't really care about
anything then your brain will tell you
be reasonable and tell you that to go
that's when you really have to at that
moment that you feel like you don't want
to do anything is exactly the moment
that you have to do something to get off
of there because like um those
emotion they are pretty good at shoting
things around you sometime you get in
the just get I don't know in the
bath and then just get stuck in there
and then memories and stuff just get you
stuck in there and
you it's so sad inside that you don't
even know that you can push the door and
get out so you have to do something you
have to keep and then when you push the
door get out maybe work in the room or
something then it change your mind and
you're like oh this pick something down
and then you help change your mind but
if you stay in that bath uh bathroom
those same M memory will run over and
over and over have you spoken to a
therapist at
all or anyone that can help do they take
help what do what take a penny
away or bring him
back I think it's a process that you
have to go through uh it's a pain that
you just have to learn with it's like
having a
handicap uh you just have to learn to
deal with there are people today that
live pretty good without hand or food or
food uh wish at first or they get
imputated and they have to rehab to deal
with you've um you've been an
inspiration your whole life your whole
life to so many people um you now say
that um Kobe is your inspir ation and
he's he's the reason why motivation and
your motivation yeah and he's the reason
why
you are striving he's the mountain he's
pushing you up a new Mountain in your
career in this chapter of your career
and I'm
really really looking forward to seeing
this season of your career play
out yeah I hope I'll be able to do it
but I just have to get out there and
find
out Francis we have a closing tradition
on this podcast where the last guest
leaves a question for the next guest so
the last guest has left a question for
you and they don't know who they're
leaving the question for okay the
question is here when did you last
realize that you had it all
wrong when my boy pass
away that was a moment that I realized
that everything I mean everything that's
been my
reason for
fighting uh fall
apart that was a
moment that I feel that I really feel
like I feel like a
failure you felt like a failure
yeah I feel power
I I just feel like I could have done
something
just
that Francis um I have to say a huge
thank
you I have to say a big thank you and
I'm not just saying thank you for me but
um ever since I heard your story that
that time in Paris when we're in that
hotel you you put my life in perspective
Ive you gave me gratitude that I
probably didn't have to the same extent
before because you've been through an
incredible journey and throughout that
whole journey you've got this
perspective for life
where
you understand more than I ever did
what's
important things like family things like
principles you've understood that more
than I did and you also having gone
through that entire journey I didn't
hear you feeling pitiful complaining
about the struggles you'd been through
and I reflect on the life that I've
lived and the things that I'd dwelled on
and I thought oh my God this guy has
walked out of a really really dire
situation and built this the most
incredible life he's climbed to the top
of the mountain and it's funny because
when you climb to those the top of those
mountains you get there alone what you
don't ever get to see is that you've
actually brought millions of people
there too because you've inspired them
and you've shown them proven that they
have no reason why they can't to if
Francis could if Francis could go from
Cameroon on that Journey Through the
Sahara Desert he tried to climb the
fence couldn't get over the fence then
went through the Sea on the boat from
Spain to Paris from Paris to the USA to
the top of the mountain to beating Tyson
Fury there is absolutely nothing that I
can't
do yeah I um I think so I think there's
a lot we we set ourself for we set a lot
of limit of ourself uh by just like oh
it's not possible um which again we
don't know what's possible or not um
but staying there thinking of what's
possible or not does help actions help
and sometime you try you fail it's okay
you stand you stand back up pick your
reset start again and then until
you make it and then once you you you
really make it and I'm like oh he good
he's a genius like how did he know that
this will work he didn't know anything
just keep trying just refused to give up
it's just like that and it's a some it's
something that um you know because at
some point like I feel like um I need to
succeed in order to prove everybody that
was doubting at me uh to prove them
wrong because even like coming from
where I came from having the idea of
boxing bro he was the worst thing that
it worst dream that you could have have
like
everybody nobody believe in me in in it
in the dream not in me but just in the
dream like it's not possible we can't
came come from where we come we are uh
to get there it's not possible it's not
mean for us find something that is
around us and get S you know like really
thought I was losing it basically like
when I let um my little job in the
village like say go to the city I was 22
years old and I I saw my motorcycle like
okay go to the store and buy gloves and
stuff that I'm doing boxing D like okay
this how this guy has got to the uh top
level of craziness what the what the
hell is this you know and uh everybody
doubt it
I mean even my mom say like you're my
son I always stand by your side even
when you're losing it like
now like okay at least I know that you
know but on one day he happened I made
it and I'm like wow he's a genius how do
you know that is going to work I didn't
know just keep doing it you know so
whatever you have we can keep trying it
might work might not but at least you
will be in peace with yourself knowing
that you have given it all I think it's
the most important people are so afraid
to
fail that they don't even try and I
think that's really that's the failure
from not taking action the failure is
not
actually uh the fact that you you are
not Su you don't succeed in whatever you
do failure is not taking action it's not
even trying that's why you really
fair Francis thank you thank you thank
you so much hly it's the the most
amazing honor and you're such an
incredible person on an on and off
camera you're such a wonderful human
being but you're just the most
tremendous inspiration I've interviewed
three 400 people but I've never ever
encountered a story as you you do that a
lot yeah interviewing people as heroic
as yours so I rather I than interviewing
people
thank you
[Music]